### **Life cycle impact on the valuation of firms with negative earnings**

##### **What:** 

The population of firms reporting negative earnings has been steadily rising. according to Collins et al (1999), negative earnings make up at 30% of the sample in Compustat. more recent data suggest that as at 2015, loss firms outnumbered profitable firms (51% of Compustat sample excluding financial and utility firms). this is a significant anomaly for two reasons:

- accounting earnings are upward biased compared to economic earnings suggesting that even more firms would have negative economic earnings
- as suggested by Hayn (1995), losses are a drawing from the extremities of the earnings generating distribution

This makes understanding the valuation of and factors that affect the valuation of firms with negative earnings even important.

Earlier literature has observed a negative returns-earning relation (ERC) for loss firms (Burgstahler and Dichev 1997, Jan and Ou 2005, Kothari and Zimmermann 1995) but were unable to provide an explanation for the occurrence and the cross-sectional variation observed. 

Hayn (1995) initially suggested that this relation was responsible for the lower than expected ERCs documented in prior research work (Easton, Harris and Ohlson 1992). She documented and suggested that the lower information content of losses is partly due to their transitory nature. In other words, losses cannot be persistent as the firm will go out of business or its shareholders will exercise their put option by liquidating the firm's assets.

Further investigation by Collins et al (1999) show that the negative ERCs are likely a result of a misspecified model. The inclusion of the firm book value in the return-earning equation captures the idea that investors consider both the abandonment value of the firm's assets and the expected future cash flows.

As more technology firms get listed on the stock exchange with negative earnings, it becomes even more important to understand the factors that affect value for these firms. Not all loss firms are equal. As Hayn(1995) showed, prices were less sensitive when a firm was more likely to go bankrupt.

Other studies have focused on certain industries. Hand (2003) looks at internet firms between 1997 - 2000 and suggests that the negative pricing of losses is due to the expensing of intangible assets such as R&D as required by accounting rules. Joos (2008) on the other hand evaluate a sample of  biotechnology firm IPOs between 1980 and 2000 and reach a similar conclusion.

A currently missing piece in the literature in my opinion is the lifecycle impact on the return-earnings relationship. A firm could be making accounting losses in the early or growth stage as its managers make investments in capturing a market. It could also be the case that the losses, usually as the firm matures, are due to competitive forces in the firm's market.

The differences between loss types that result across different lifecycle stages should affect the valuation of the firm through both the expectation of future cash flows (recursion value) - a function of the persistence of the firm's business technology - and its abandonment value (worst case adaptation value)

##### **Why:**

Since losses are generally uninformative for the valuation of negative earnings, investigating the cross-sectional differences in lifecycle stage could improve the knowledge of accounting researchers on this subject. 

Specifically using a cash flow based mapping as suggested in Dickinson (2011) could allow us capture differences in firm's profitability growth and risk. the research suggests that the cash flow pattern proxy can allow us identify differential behavior in the persistence and intertemporal convergence patterns of profitability.

In this paper I intend to look at the universe of loss making firms and document the differences in early stage (growth) firms and later stage (mature) firms as well as perform confirmatory simple asset pricing tests to see if the firm lifecycle stage is a good predictor of future returns.

As a firm (industry) matures it is likely that the persistence of it’s business technology declines either by way of competition (new entrants) or obsolescence through a change in customer preferences. This suggests that we would expect differences in the “persistence” of the business technology by life cycle stage.

##### **How:** 

I propose to document this knowledge in three steps:

- **Base Model**
  $$
  R_t = \alpha + \beta_1 X_t/P_{t-1} + \beta_2 X_t/P_{t-1} * GROWTH_t + \beta_3 X_t/P_{t-1} * MATURE_t + \epsilon_t
  $$
  **prediction**: `B2` > `B3`

  

- **2nd Model**
  $$
  \beta_{i,t \ | where \ i\ = (1,2)} = \delta_0 + \delta_1 FUTX_t + \delta_2 EXITV_t +\omega_t
  $$
  **prediction**: `gamma1` growth > `gamma1` mature

  

- **Future returns model (Buy and Hold over 12 months)**
  $$
  EXCESS\_RET_{12} = \alpha + \beta_1GROWTH_t + \beta_2MATURE_t + \epsilon_t
  $$
  **prediction**:  `B1` > `B2`



##### Comments:

Dickinson (2011) proposes a mapping according to the five life cycle stages defined in Gort and Klepper (1982) - introduction, growth, maturity, shakeout and decline. In this paper, I intend to consolidate introduction and growth as GROWTH, and the other three categories as MATURE hopefully without loss of information.